---
label: 17
weight: 117
object:
  - id: 17
type: entry
---

## Provenance

–1981, Edwin A. Lipps (Pacific Palisades, California); 1981, donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum; one of a group of sixty-three Greek, East Greek, and South Italian fragments. Following a collaborative research project, fifty-two of these fragments were identified as coming from Francavilla Marittima and deaccessioned (see further, F. van der Wielen-van Ommeren and L. de Lachenal, eds., *La dea di Sibari e il santuario ritrovato: Studi sui rinvenimenti dal Timpone Motta di Francavilla Marittima*, vols. 1.1 and 1.2 [Rome, 2007–8]). The fragments that were not associated with the site—including this one—remain in the collection.

## Shape and Ornament

Single fragment from the neck. Addorsed palmette and lotus chain on the protruding upper frieze of the neck. Interior black.

## Subject

Maenad and satyr. On the right is preserved the balding head of a satyr facing left. Before him, in the center, remains the upper edge of an object, possibly a *krotalon* or a drinking horn. On the left is preserved the back of the head of a maenad facing left, in front of the satyr. Both figures have wreaths around their heads. It is not clear whether the satyr pursues the maenad.

## Attribution and Date

Attributed to Euthymides or early Kleophrades Painter by J. R. Guy and J. Gaunt. Circa 520–510 B.C.

## Dimensions and Condition

Max. preserved dimensions: height 7 cm; width 6.7 cm; thickness (upper frieze) 1.2 cm; thickness (lower frieze) 0.9 cm. Chip between the figures.

## Technical Features

Incision used for hair of figures, palmette, and parts of the lotus chain. Accessory color. Red: palmette hearts and cuffs, calyces of lotuses, wreaths.

## Bibliography

{{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater,”" >}} p. 511, cat. no. 3.

## Comparanda

For Euthymides, see [entry no. 18](/catalogue/18/) (80.AE.138.13).

For the Kleophrades Painter, see [entry no. 19](/catalogue/19/) (77.AE.11).

The use of incision and the palmette and lotus chain rendered in black-figure technique indicate an early date. For black-figure volute-kraters carrying the same ornament on the neck, see {{< q-abbr "Hitzl, *Die Entstehung und Entwicklung des Volutenkraters*" >}}, pp. 290–301, nos. 29–36; {{< q-abbr "Schleiffenbaum, *Volutenkrater*" >}}, nos. V42, V53, V72, V88, V94, V102, V121, V125, V129, fig. 10 (all dating to the last third of the sixth century B.C.). For the shape of the volute-krater, see also L. Burn, “The Contexts of the Production and Distribution of Athenian Painted Pottery around 400 BC,” in {{< q-abbr "*Pronomos Vase*" >}}, pp. 25–26.

For thiasos scenes, see {{< q-abbr "Schöne, *Thiasos*" >}}; M. Edwards, “Representation of Maenads on Archaic Red-Figure Vases,” {{< q-abbr "*JHS*" >}} 80 (1960): 78–87; {{< q-abbr "Carpenter, *Dionysian Imagery in Archaic Greek Art*" >}}; D. Paleothodoros, “L’imagerie dionysiaque dans la céramique attique à figures rouges de la période archaïque et du début du classicisme, 530–450 avant J.-C.” (Ph.D. diss., Catholic University of Louvain, 1997); S. Moraw, *Die Mänade in der attischen Vasenmalerei des 6. und 5. Jahrhunderts v. Chr.* (Mainz, 1998); G. Fahlbusch, *Die Frauen im Gefolge des Dionysos auf den attischen Vasenbildern des 6. und 5. Jhs. v. Chr. als Spiegel des weiblichen Idealbildes* (Oxford, 2004); M. H. Delavaud-Roux, “Communiquer avec Dionysos: La danse des ménades à travers l’iconographie des vases grecs,” in *L’expression des corps: Gestes, attitudes, regards dans l’iconographie antique*, ed. L. Bodiou, D. Frère, V. Mehl, and A. Tourraix (Rennes, 2006), pp. 153–63; E. Manakidou, “Parallages se ena thema: Hērakles kai Nēreus se attiko melanomorpho amphorea apo tēn Oisymē,” in {{< q-abbr "*Kerameōs Paides*" >}}, p. 64.

For a satyr holding *krotala*, cf. a cup by the Brygos Painter in Paris, {{< q-abbr "Cab. Méd." >}} 576 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 371.14; C. Gasparri, in {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 3 [1986], pt. 1, p. 463, no. 465, s.v. “Dionysos”).

For a satyr holding a drinking horn, cf. a cup from the Circle of the Nikosthenes Painter in Rome, Villa Giulia 50385 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 134.7; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 177; J. Harrison, “Monuments Relating to the Odyssey,” {{< q-abbr "*JHS*" >}} 4 [1883]: 255 and plate at 252; R. F. Sutton, *The Interaction between Men and Women Portrayed on Attic Red-Figured Pottery* [Ann Arbor, 1981], p. 144, note 155); cup-skyphos attributed to the Lanćut Group, Follower of the Haimon Painter, in Athens, Agora P 30135 (S. I. Rotroff and J. H. Oakley, *Debris from a Public Dining Place in the Athenian Agora* [Princeton, 1992], p. 62, no. 3, fig. 1, pl. 1); cup by Onesimos, Aleria 61.35 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1645.6; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 359; B. A. Sparkes, “Aspects of Onesimos,” in *Greek Art: Archaic into Classical, A Symposium Held at the University of Cincinnati, April 2–3, 1982*, ed. C. G. Boulter [Leiden, 1985], p. 22, pls. 24–25).
