---
label: 18
weight: 118
object:
  - id: 18
type: entry
---

## Provenance

–1980, Mary Ann Petery (Selma, California); 1980, donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum; one of a group of 22 Attic black- and red-figure fragments; according to Museum documentation, “the fragments were purchased several years ago by M. Petery in the Parisian Flea Market,” but this has not been verified; the fragments with which this piece has been associated (see below) were previously on loan to Princeton University Art Museum from Ariel Herrmann.

## Shape and Ornament

Single fragment preserving part of the shoulder and body. Figural scene bordered on top by a tongue pattern on the shoulder at the junction with neck. Interior: upper part reserved, lower part black.

## Subject

The fragment preserves the helmet of a warrior facing left. The edge of the helmet’s turned-up cheekpiece is visible. At the right end of the fragment are preserved two closed fingers of his hand. He is probably in an attacking position.

## Attribution and Date

Attributed to Euthymides by J. R. Guy and M. Robertson. Circa 500 B.C.

## Dimensions and Condition

Max. preserved dimension 4.86 cm. Slightly burnt. Chip at the left end. Black on the lower half of the fragment, reserved below.

## Technical Features

Preliminary sketch. Relief contour.

## Bibliography

{{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater" >}},” p. 512, cat. no. 5.

## Comparanda

For Euthymides, see {{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 26–30; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 323–24; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 155–57; J. C. Hoppin, *Euthymides* (Munich, 1896); idem, *Euthymides and His Fellows* (Cambridge, 1917); J. D. Beazley, “Review of J. C. Hoppin, *Euthymides and His Fellows*, {{< q-abbr "*JHS*" >}} 37 (1917): 233–37; M. Wegner, *Euthymides und Euphronios* (Münster, 1979); M. Ohly-Dumm, “Sosias und Euthymides,” in {{< q-abbr "*Ancient Greek and Related Pottery*" >}}, pp. 165–72; E. Reschke, *Die Ringer des Euthymides* (Stuttgart, 1990); {{< q-abbr "*Agora* 30" >}}, pp. 86–87; C. Börker, “Zu den Namen der attischen Vasenmaler Euphronios und Euthymides,” in *Zona Archeologica: Festschrift für Hans Peter Isler zum 60. Geburtstag*, ed. S. Buzzi, D. Käch, E. Kistler, E. Mango, M. Palaczyk, and O. Stefani (Bonn, 2001), pp. 53–56.

According to J. R. Guy, the fragment should be associated with the fragments in a private collection (formerly on loan to Princeton, lent by Ariel Herrmann), all belonging to a volute-krater with an Amazonomachy. The helmet on this fragment may belong to the right-hand Greek warrior depicted on that krater. For those volute-krater fragments, see {{< q-abbr "Robertson, *Art of Vase-Painting*" >}}, p. 58; J. M. Padgett, in *In Celebration: Works of Art from the Collections of Princeton Alumni and Friends of The Art Museum, Princeton University*, ed. A. Rosenbaum (Princeton, 1997), p. 14, no. 11; Gaunt (supra) recognizes the scene as a Heraklean Amazonomachy.

Cf. the helmet of the Giant on the cup with coral-red by Euthymides in Athens, National Archaeological Museum, Akropolis Collection 2.211 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 29.20; A. Verbanck-Piérard, “The Colors of the Akropolis: Special Techniques for Athena,” in {{< q-abbr "*Special Techniques in Athenian Vases*" >}}, p. 51. fig. 4); the helmet in Hecuba’s hand on the belly amphora (type A) by Euthymides in Munich, Staatliche Antikensammlungen 2307 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 26.1; A. F. Laurens, in {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 4 [1988], pt. 1, p. 476, no. 16, s.v. “Hekabe”). For a volute-krater by Euthymides, see J. Neils, “The Euthymides Krater from Morgantina,” {{< q-abbr "*AJA*" >}} 99 (1995): 427–44.
