---
label: 20
weight: 120
object:
  - id: 20
type: entry
---

## Provenance

By 1983, Walter and Molly Bareiss (Bareiss number 39); 1983–86, the Mary S. Bareiss 1983 Trust; 1986, sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum.

## Shape and Ornament

Single neck fragment. Interior black.

## Subject

Ilioupersis? In the foreground, part of a fallen figure lying on the ground. A nude leg or an arm is draped limply over the head. Behind it, the lower body and legs of a draped woman (chiton and himation) walking to left. At right, a draped youth sits on the ground, facing right. Between the latter and the draped woman is preserved the leg of a tripod.

## Attribution and Date

Attributed to the Kleophrades Painter by the author. Circa 490–480 B.C.

## Dimensions and Condition

Max. preserved dimensions: height 4.9 cm; width 3.3 cm; thickness 1.1 cm. Surface scratched; chips missing on exterior and interior.

## Technical Features

Preliminary sketch. Relief contour.

## Bibliography

“Acquisitions/1986,” {{< q-abbr "*GettyMusJ*" >}} 15 (1987): 160–61, no. 7; {{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater,”" >}} p. 530, cat. no. 52.

## Comparanda

The proportions of the figures and the size of the fragment indicate that it comes from a krater as large as [entry no. 19](/catalogue/19/) (77.AE.11). The execution of the design is very carefully done, similar to entry no. 19. Cf. the drapery with that on fragment 86.AE.587 of entry no. 19; the facial features recall those of the Amazons on fragment 97.AE.58.2 of the same krater.

The preserved elements of the lost figural scene indicate that the subject depicted is the Ilioupersis. Cf. the Onesimos cup in Rome, Villa Giulia (once in Malibu, J. Paul Getty Museum 83.AE.362, 84.AE.80, 86.AE.385; see D. Williams, “Onesimos and the Getty Iliupersis,” in {{< q-abbr "*Greek Vases in the Getty* 5" >}}, pp. 41–64; {{< q-abbr "Mangold, *Kassandra in Athen*" >}}, pp. 47, 161, no. I 28, fig. 26: tripod next to Palladion, foot of fallen figure); a kalpis by the Kleophrades Painter in Naples, Museo Archeologico Nazionale 81669 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 189.74; {{< q-abbr "Mangold, *Kassandra in Athen*" >}}, figs. 27, 59, 64: seated females next to Palladion); a hydria by the Group of Polygnotos in Rome, Palazzo Torlonia ({{< q-abbr "Mangold, *Kassandra in Athen*" >}}, fig. 55: Menelaos and Helen, fallen tripod beneath Menelaos’s legs).
