Pandoc formula used:

pandoc --atx-header --wrap=none -s 9-Catalogue-CVA_FINAL.docx -t markdown-smart -o catalogue.md

Things done after Markdown conversion:

- Remove backslash escape characters added by pandoc: \_ \[ \]
- Remove line spaces between all YAML front matter items
- Convert headings to title case
- Search for stray heading formatting on paragraphs
- Search and remove {.underline} formatting
- Check for **bold** marked notes from editor, address them as necessary, and clear
- Move figure callouts to their own line
- Covert entry links from verbose notation [entry no. 2](file:///Users/sharonherson/Documents/GETTY-CVA/FilesforDAVID_Nov30/2) to true links [entry no. 2](/catalogue/2/)
- Replace markdown superscript tags (`^ ^`) with html (`<sup> </sup>`)
- Update some YAML naming for readability (plate_no: to plates:, etc.)
- Convert figure shortcode markers to single curly bracket to distinguish from abbreviation shortcode markers.
- Find and replace abbreviation shortcode markers with actual shortcode
- Fix italicized text broken by an unneccessary space. Such as *Beazley* *Archive*, when it should just be *Beazley Archive*


# Column-Kraters

id: 1
plates: 518–20
accession_number: 86.AE.205
bareiss_number: 342
fabric: Athenian
technique: Red-figure
shape_name: Krater, Column-
attribution: Myson
attributor: J. D. Beazley
date: -490 to -480
subject: akontist, athlete, bridle, deer, dog, goat, *halteres*, himation, horse, javelin, jumper, *kentron*, panther, pick, sponge, staff, stick, strigil, trainer

## Provenance

By 1967–83, Walter and Molly Bareiss (Bareiss number 342; the vase is mentioned in a letter from Sir John Beazley to Walter Bareiss, dated June 16, 1967); 1983–86, the Mary S. Bareiss 1983 Trust; 1986, sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1986.

## Shape and Ornament

Rim slightly convex on top with a vertical overhang; a flat handle plate extending beyond the rim at each side supported by two columns; ovoid body; ogee foot. Palmettes with volutes on the handle plates framed by pairs of vertical lines. Overhang of the rim: double row of ivy leaves (A) or dots (B) with lines above, below, and between. On the neck: A, black dotted chain of pendant lotus buds between two black lines in a reserved panel; B, black. Figural decoration on the body panels framed by double row of dots between black lines at the sides and a row of short black tongues on the shoulder at the junction with the neck. Reserved band below. Zone of black rays above foot. Outside of the foot is black, except for the lower part. Resting surface and underside foot reserved. Interior black.

{ figure profile-1 }

## Subject

Top of rim. A. Two pairs of a grazing deer and panther in black silhouette.

B. Two pairs of a grazing goat and panther in black silhouette.

Body. A. Two nude youths walking to right with their horses. They look at one another and each holds a *kentron* (goad) in his right hand.

B. Athletes training: a nude akontist (javelin thrower) on the left, a trainer in the center, and a nude jumper practicing with a pair of weights (*halteres*) on the right. The akontist is presented in a three-quarter back view, moving to left while turning his head back toward the trainer. He holds his javelin horizontally in his right hand with his arm outstretched. A freestanding stick is fixed between the akontist and the trainer. The trainer, wearing a himation, stands to right, with his back to the viewer and his head turned left to watch the akontist. He holds a staff in his upraised right hand. The jumper stands to left with his right foot advanced and his arms outstretched in front, holding the *halteres* in his hands. Behind and looking up at him, at the right, are the foreparts of a dog in profile. A sponge and a strigil hang at the upper right; a javelin and a pick rest on the ground.

## Attribution and Date

Attributed to Myson by J. D. Beazley. Circa 490–480 B.C.

## Dimensions and Condition

Height 34 cm; diam. of rim 31.9 cm (outside); diam. of rim 25.7 (inside); width with handles 37 cm; diam. of body 31.2 cm; diam. of foot (as restored) 17.1 cm. Capacity to rim 11.124 liters. Reconstructed from several fragments with the joins between fragments filled with plaster and painted. Black pitted in places. Abrasion in places.

## Technical Features

Preliminary sketch. Relief contour. Accessory color. Red: inside rim, line around the vase beneath figured panel, reins and bridle of horses, upper edge of javelin at side B.

## Bibliography

{{< q-abbr "*BAPD*" >}} 19726 and 352504; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 349.29 *ter*; H. May, ed., *Weltkunst aus Privatbesitz*, exh. cat. Kunsthalle Köln, May 18–August 4, 1968 (Cologne, 1968), cat. no. A 34; {{< q-abbr "*Greek Vases and Modern Drawings*" >}}, p. 4, no. 45 (68.142.18); {{< q-abbr "*Greek Vases*" >}}, p. 76, no. 102; “Acquisitions/1986,” {{< q-abbr "*GettyMusJ*" >}} 15 (1987): 160–61, no. 7; {{< q-abbr "Bron, “Chevaux et la Danse”" >}}: 20–28, pl. 6.1,3; P. Valavanis, *Games and Sanctuaries in Ancient Greece: Olympia, Delphi, Isthmia, Nemea, Athens*, trans. from Greek by D. Hardy (Los Angeles, 2004), p. 416, fig. 600; J. B. Grossman, *Athletes in Antiquity: Works from the Collection of the J. Paul Getty Museum*, exh. cat. (Salt Lake City, 2002), p. 30; Perseus Digital Library Project, Tufts University, <http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/artifact?name=Malibu+86.AE.205&object=Vase>.

## Loans

Cologne, Kunsthalle Köln, *Weltkunst aus Privatbesitz*, May 18–August 4, 1968; New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, *Greek Vases and Modern Drawings from the Collection of Mr. and Mrs. Walter Bareiss*, June 13–October 5, 1969; Salt Lake City, Utah, Museum of Fine Arts, *Athletes in Antiquity: Works from the Collection of the J. Paul Getty Museum*, February 1–April 15, 2002.

## Comparanda

For Myson, see {{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 237–44, 1638–39; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 349, 510; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 201–2; {{< q-abbr "Beazley, “Vases in the Ashmolean”" >}}, pp. 313–18; {{< q-abbr "Beazley, *Vases in American Museums*" >}}, pp. 48–52; {{< q-abbr "Becker, *Formen attischer Peliken*" >}}, pp. 71–72; J. Neils, *The Youthful Deeds of Theseus* (Rome, 1987), pp. 53–57; L. Berge, “Myson: A Craftsman of Athenian Red-Figured Vases” (Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1992); {{< q-abbr "Robertson, *Art of Vase-Painting*" >}}, pp. 124–27; {{< q-abbr "*Agora* 30" >}}, pp. 94–95; {{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater”" >}}, pp. 218–19, 514, no. 1.

The column-krater is the favorite shape of Myson (see {{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 239–42, nos. 18–76; {{< q-abbr "*BAPD*" >}}, s.v. Myson; cf. [entry no. 2](/catalogue/2/) [73.AE.135]), and it has been suggested that he was one of the vase-painters responsible for reintroducing the shape into the Attic repertory (C. M. Cardon, “The Berlin Painter and His School” [Ph.D. diss., Institute of Fine Arts, New York University, 1977], p. 72; {{< q-abbr "Mannack, *Late Mannerists*" >}}, pp. 5, 50). The figural scenes are placed in panels as here or are unframed as in [entry no. 2](/catalogue/2/) (73.AE.135). For a similar scene and ornament as on A, cf. a column-krater by the same vase-painter in Boston, Museum of Fine Arts 1973.572 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1638.23 *bis*; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 349; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 201; {{< q-abbr "Bron, “Chevaux et la Danse”" >}}, pl. 6.2).

Figures in black silhouette occur more frequently on the overhang of the rim; cf. [entry no. 12](/catalogue/12/) (81.AE.161). For rims decorated on top with figures in black silhouette, see K. Schauenburg, “Silene beim Symposion,” {{< q-abbr "*JdI*" >}} 88 (1973): 1–26, esp. 14–20; {{< q-abbr "Mannack, *Late Mannerists*" >}}, p. 63. Cf. the column-krater in Martin von Wagner Museum, University of Würzburg L 526 by Myson ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 239, 19; 1639; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 201; Perseus Digital Library Project, Tufts University (<http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/image?img=Perseus:image:1992.09.0362>) with the same motif on top of rim. Cf. also column-kraters Louvre G 346 by the Mykonos Painter ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 515.3; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Louvre 4 [France 5], III, Id, pl. 29.8); Harvard 60.346 by the Pig Painter ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 563.8; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 260; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Baltimore, Robinson Collection 3 [USA 7], pls. 6.1, 7.1a–b); Hannover, Kestner Museum 1963.27 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 567.16; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 390; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Hannover 1, pl. 37.2); Lecce, Museo Provinciale 602 in the manner of the Pig Painter ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 569.39; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Lecce 1 [Italy 4], pl. 5); and Gela, Museo Archeologico Nazionale 103 by the Boreas Painter ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 537.23; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Gela 3 [Italy 54], pl. 28).

Youths leading horses is a popular theme in Attic vase-painting, but it is difficult to be sure which representations are connected with sport and which are not. Given that the scene on side B depicts an athletic subject, it is possible that the horses on side A could be part of an athletic competition as well. Horses played a prominent role in the ancient Greek world, and Xenophon wrote a treatise *On Horsemanship* in the early fourth century B.C. For a similar scene, see the krater noted above in Boston, Museum of Fine Arts 1973.572 and a column-krater by the Flying-Angel Painter in Lausanne, Private Collection ({{< q-abbr "Bron, “Chevaux et la Danse”" >}}, pl. 5). For a horse rendered in a similar way, cf. a column-krater in the manner of Myson in Berlin, Antikensammlung 31404 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}}243.4; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 202; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Berlin 11 [Germany 86], pl. 5.2, 6.1).

For nude riders and their interpretation, see J. K. Anderson, *Ancient Greek Horsemanship* (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1961), pp. 85–87; {{< q-abbr "Kyle, *Athletics*" >}}, pp. 186–87; E. Maul-Mandelartz, *Griechische Reiterdarstellungen in agonistischen Zusammenhang* (Frankfurt, 1990), pp. 50, 52, 53, 77; {{< q-abbr "Goossens, Thielemans, and Thas, “Sport Scenes”" >}}: 64. For the subject, see also M. Moore, “Horses on Black-figured Greek Vases of the Archaic Period: ca. 620–480 B.C.” (Ph.D. diss., Institute of Fine Arts, New York University, 1971); G. R. Bugh, *The Horsemen of Athens* (Princeton, 1988), pp. 14–20; I. G. Spence, *The Cavalry of Classical Greece: A Social and Military History* (Oxford, 1993); J. Barrie, “The Horse on Attic Pottery from the Ninth to the Fourth Century B.C.” (Ph.D. diss., University of Ottawa, 1993); J. McK. Camp, *Horses and Horsemanship in the Athenian Agora*, Excavations of the Athenian Agora. Picture Book 24 (Athens, 1998); M. Moore, “Horse Care as Depicted on Greek Vases before 400 B.C.,” {{< q-abbr "*MMAJ*" >}} 39 (2004): 35–67. Cf. also M. A. Eaverly, *Archaic Greek Equestrian Sculpture* (Ann Arbor, 1995), pp. 47–56.

For similar scenes in the palaestra, cf. column-kraters by Myson, Louvre CA 1947 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 240.44; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 349; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 201; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Louvre 2 [France 2], pl. 24, with akontist, aulos player, and jumper), Villa Giulia 1044 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 239.23; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} 2 [Italy 2], pl. 16.1.2, with jumpers and *diskobolos*), and Villa Giulia 984 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 239.21; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} 2 [Italy 2], pl. 15, with akontist, *diskobolos*, and jumper). Cf. also the psykter by Oltos in New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Rogers Fund, 10.210.18 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 54.7; {{< q-abbr "von Bothmer, “Red-Figured Kylix”" >}}, 8–9, figs. 2a–d). For palaestra scenes, see A. Bruckner, “Palästradarstellungen auf frührotfigurigen attischen Vasen” (Ph.D. diss., Basel, 1954), esp. pp. 62–69, 70–75 for javelin throwing and jumping respectively; {{< q-abbr "Kyle, *Athletics*" >}}, pp. 50–53; {{< q-abbr "Miller, *Ancient Greek Athletics*" >}}, pp. 60–72, 176–95. See also {{< q-abbr "von Bothmer, “Red-Figured Kylix”" >}}, 5–20; S. Karouzou, “Scènes de palestre,” {{< q-abbr "*BCH*" >}} 86 (1962): 430–66. Cf. also D. G. Kyle, *Sport and Spectacle in the Ancient World* (Oxford, 2007); S. Lewis, “Athletics on Attic Pottery: Export and Imagery,” in *The World of Greek Vases*, ed. V. Norskov, L. Hannestad, C. Isler-Kerényi, and S. Lewis (Analecta Romana Instituti Danici. Supplementum 61, Rome, 2009), pp. 133–48.

Scenes of javelin throwing belong mainly to the palaestra scenes and become common from the last quarter of the sixth century B.C. onward. See {{< q-abbr "Legakis, “Athletic Contests”" >}}, pp. 318–55, cat. no. 10; {{< q-abbr "Goossens, Thielemans, and Thas, “Sport Scenes”" >}}: 65, 69, 73. For javelin throwing, see E. N. Gardiner, “Throwing the Javelin,” {{< q-abbr "*JHS*" >}} 27 (1907): 249–73; R. Partucco, *Lo Sport nella Grecia antica* (Florence, 1972), pp. 171–89; E. N. Gardiner, *Athletics of the Ancient World* (Chicago, 1980), pp. 169–76; G. Doblhofer, P. Mauritsch, and M. Lavrecic, *Speerwurf: Texte, Übersetzungen, Kommentar* (Vienna, 1993).

Javelin throwing and jumping belong to the pentathlon. For the pentathlon, see [entry no. 2](/catalogue/2/) (73.AE.135).

The long jump appears frequently on Attic vases after the third quarter of the sixth century B.C. See {{< q-abbr "Goossens, Thielemans, and Thas, “Sport Scenes”" >}}: 75; {{< q-abbr "Legakis, “Athletic Contests”" >}}, pp. 276–317, cat. no. 9.

The *halteres* depicted here are of the Archaic type used in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C. Cf. the *halteres* on the column-kraters by Myson on Villa Giulia 984 (supra) and Villa Giulia 1044 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 239.23; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} 2 [Italy 2], pl. 16.1.2); the stone *halteres* in Athens, National Museum 1926 ({{< q-abbr "*Mind and Body*" >}}, pp. 175–76, no. 66); a black-figure cup close to the Painter of Vatican G69 in Paris, Louvre Cp 10376 ({{< q-abbr "*ABV*" >}} 210.3; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Louvre 10 [France 17], pl. 107.3.8); a lekythos by the Bowdoin Painter in Athens, National Museum 17281 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 684.145; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Athens 2 [Greece 2], pl. 12.6–7); a fragment of a kalpis by the Nikoxenos Painter in an English private collection ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 222.24; {{< q-abbr "Robertson, *Art of Vase-Painting*" >}}, p. 118, fig. 119).

For *halteres* and their types, see {{< q-abbr "*Mind and Body*" >}}, pp. 98, 175–76, 234, 253–54; K. Palaiologou, in *Oi Olympiakoi Agones stin Archaia Ellada. Archaia Olympia kai Olympiakoi Agones* (Athens, 1982), pp. 176–87. See also D. Knöpfler, “Haltère de bronze dédié à Apollon Hékabolos dans la collection G. Ortiz (Genève),” *Comptes rendus des séances de l’Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres (Paris)* 1994: 337–79; F. Knauß, “Weitsprung,” in {{< q-abbr "*Lockender Lorbeer*" >}} pp. 118–27.

For the strigil, see E. Kotera-Feyer, “Die Strigilis in der attisch-rotfigurigen Vasenmalerei: Bildformeln und ihre Deutung,” *Nikephoros* 11 (1998): 107–36, with earlier bibliography; S. Lorenz, “Nicht nur mit Schwamm und Schaber . . . ,” in {{< q-abbr "*Lockender Lorbeer*" >}}, pp. 266–69.

For trainer (*paedotribes*), see {{< q-abbr "Kyle, *Athletics*" >}}, pp. 141–45.

Back views, introduced into vase-painting by the Pioneers, are often used by Myson. Cf. the akontists on the column-kraters Louvre CA 1947 (supra) and Villa Giulia 984 (supra); the *diskobolos* and komast on the column-krater Villa Giulia 1044 (supra); Herakles on the column-krater Florence 3981 (A. M. Esposito and G. de Tommaso, *Vasi Attici. Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Firenze Antiquarium* [Florence, 1993], p. 55, fig. 76). Cf. also the twisting poses and back views of the athletes in low relief on a kouros base in Athens, National Museum 3476 (A. Stewart, *Greek Sculpture* [New Haven, 1990], pp. 122–23, figs. 138–40); the boxer on the amphora by the Kleophrades Painter in Munich, Staatliche Antikensammlungen 2305 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 121.3; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Munich 4 [Germany 12], pl. 173.1). For the back view of the trainer on B, cf. also the three-quarter back view of the middle komast on the amphora Type A by Euthymides in Munich, Staatliche Antikensammlungen 2307 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 26.1;1620; {{< q-abbr "*Agora* 30" >}}, p. 86). It is generally accepted that Myson learned to draw in the Pioneer workshop, and his vases recall Phintias, who may have been his master.

For nudity in ancient Greek athletics, see [entry no. 2](/catalogue/2/) (73.AE.135).

The hound appears to be intrigued or stricken by the athlete with the *halteres*, and he attends the training carefully. Dogs, an important element in the ancient Greek daily life, often appear in hunting scenes, but they also occur in palaestra, symposia, domestic or funeral contexts, and courtship scenes, without necessarily being an integral part of the composition or the narrative of the scene. It is during the late sixth and early fifth centuries B.C. that they meet their popularity in vase-painting. Cf. a fragmentary volute krater by the Syriskos Painter in Athens, National Museum ACR.758 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 260.4; {{< q-abbr "*Mind and Body*" >}}, pp. 161–62, no. 47); a black-figure alabastron by the Theseus Painter in Palermo, Collezione Mormino 660 ({{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Palermo, Collezione Mormino 1 [Italy 50], pl. 19.4–6); a pelike by the Triptolemos Painter in Malibu, J. Paul Getty Museum [86.AE.195](http://www.getty.edu/art/collection/objects/11939/) ({{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 364.21 *bis*; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 222; {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}}, J. Paul Getty Museum 7 [USA 32], pls. 343, 344, 347.3–4); a cup by the Triptolemos Painter in New York (NY, market, Sotheby’s [S. D. Pevnick, “Good Dog, Bad Dog: A Cup by the Triptolemos Painter and Aspects of Canine Behavior on Athenian Vases,” in {{< q-abbr "*Athenian Potters and Painters*" >}}, vol. 3, pp. 155–64]). On dogs, see D. B. Hull, *Hounds and Hunting in Ancient Greece* (Chicago, 1964); {{< q-abbr "Anderson, *Hunting*" >}}; J. H. Oakley, {{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}}, Baltimore 1 [USA 28], p. 22, with earlier references; C. Mainoldi, *L’image du loup et du chien dans la Grèce ancienne* (Paris, 1984); D. Brewer, T. Clark, and A. Phillips, *Dogs in Antiquity: Anubis to Cerberus: The Origins of the Domestic Dog* (Warminster, 2001); K. Clark, review of *Dogs in Antiquity*, by D. Brewer, T. Clark, and A. Phillips, in {{< q-abbr "*AJA*" >}} 107 (2003): 498–500. Especially for dogs on Greek vases, see M. Moore, “The Hegesiboulos Cup,” {{< q-abbr "*MMAJ*" >}} 43 (2008): 11–37. L. Calder, *Cruelty and Sentimentality: Greek Attitudes to Animals, 600–300 BC* (Oxford, 2011); M. Iozzo, “The Dog; a Dionysiac Animal?” *Rivista di archeologia* 36, 2012 (2013): 5–22; Pevnick, “Good Dog, Bad Dog” (supra), pp. 155–64; A. Petrakova, “The Emotional Dog in Attic Vase-painting: Symbolic Aspects and Instrumental Narrative Function,” in *ΦΥΤΑ ΚΑΙ ΖΩΙΑ. Pflanzen und Tiere auf griechischen Vasen. Akten des internationalen Symposiums an der Universität Graz, 26.–28. September 2013*, ed. C. Lang-Auinger and E. Trinkl (Vienna, 2015), pp. 291–98.

For preliminary sketches in Greek vase-painting, see P. E. Corbett, “Preliminary Sketch in Greek Vase Painting,” {{< q-abbr "*JHS*" >}} 85 (1965): 16–28; M. Boss, “Preliminary Sketches on Attic Red-figured Vases of the Early Fifth Century B.C.,” in {{< q-abbr "*Athenian Potters and Painters*" >}}, vol. 1, pp. 345–51.














id: 24
plates: 564–73
accession_number: 87.AE.93
bareiss_number:
fabric: Athenian
technique: Red-figure
shape_name: Krater, Volute-
attribution: M1 and M2 (formerly known as the Meleager Painter)
attributor: K. Kathariou
date: -400 to -390
subject: Adonis, animal skin, Aphrodite, Arimasp, attendant (female), aulos, baldric, banqueter, bed/couch/*kline*, blanket, bracelet, bull, chest, chignon, chiton, chlamys, club, cushion, deer, diadem, Dionysos, dog, earring, *ependytes*, Eros, fillet, food, footstool, fruit, grapevine, griffin, headband, hare, himation, kantharos, *keras*, komast/reveler, *kottabos*, *lagobolon*, lyre, maenad, mantle, mirror, necklace, peplos, Persephone, *pilos* (conical hat), plate, satyr, shield, Silenos, spear, stemless drinking cup, string of beads, sword, symposion, table, Theseus, thyrsos, torch, tree, *tympanon*

## Provenance

By 1986–87, Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland); 1987, sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum; Museum documentation records that the vase is “ex Swiss Private collection”; this information has not been verified.

## Shape and Ornament

Top of rim is black. Outside of rim on A and B decorated with Ionic *kymation* above a double palmette and lotus chain with relief dots in the palmette hearts and between the spiraling tendrils on A; on B larger upright palmette and lotus chain. An astragalos in relief runs along the molding between the rim and neck on both sides. A “rope” pattern runs around neck and body on both sides.

Upper neck. Zone of ivy vine in relief on A; myrtle wreath with berries between each pair of leaves on B.

Handles rise from the heads of four African men placed on the shoulder. Curling S-shaped scrolls with buds or leaves attached bridge the handles with the neck. Upper terminals of the volutes masked with concave disks decorated with gilded frontal female heads in relief in the center; around the heads, a frame is formed by five encircled palmettes each rendered with a raised heart. The roundels of the volutes of the handles are ringed by red chains of myrtle leaves with berries between each pair of leaves. The same leaf chain runs along the outer flanges of handles. A reserved strip along handles is visible on sides of the handles.

The body, squat and round like a dinos, is black, and decorated with vertical ribbing with even arches at the top. A smooth band above the widest circumference interrupts the ribbing and is decorated with a wreath of olive leaves and fruits interspersed, rendered in clay relief; the ends of the wreath are twisted together in the center of side A, just below the principal figure scene. The ribbing at the body ends shortly above the base, below which is a notched ridge. The walls of the vase draw to a projecting ring instead of a foot that was used to place the vessel securely upon its separate stand. The stand should originally have had a stem with an upper resting surface (now a modern reconstruction) for the the rounded bottom of the vase. The stand is divided into two parts. The upper part is decorated with a short Ionic *kymation* set between notched ridges. The figural scene is set between an Ionic *kymation* and a palmette and lotus chain; a notched ridge divides the two parts. A broad zone with long black-glaze tongues runs around the lower part of the stand. Ionic *kymation*; notched edge. Resting surface and underside stand reserved.

{ figure profile-24 a, b and c }

## Subject

Neck. A. Adonis and Aphrodite. The hero reclines facing left on a *kline* covered with a fringed and elaborately embroidered blanket at the center of the scene. He is propped up on cushions, a richly patterned himation draped over his lower body and legs; his upper body, nude, plump, and soft-looking, is missing the head, but his long hair can be seen in the curls running down over the left shoulder and breast; both his hands are raised to bind a fillet around his head. Eros crouches on the left end of the *kline*, and offers Adonis some round objects rendered in relief (fruits?) with his right hand; he holds a plate in his left with similar objects (two on each side of the plate are rendered in relief, four in the middle as white dots). Eros is nude with long curly hair and a fillet around his head. A low table or footstool with two round objects (fruits?) lies in front of the *kline*. At the left end of the scene, Aphrodite sits on a chest by the feet of Adonis, as two women (attendants?) stand behind her. The goddess, presented in three-quarter view, is dressed in a finely pleated diaphanous chiton that slips off her left shoulder and an elaborately patterned himation that is wrapped around her legs. Her hair is pulled back in a chignon, and she wears bracelets and a necklace. She looks back to the standing women, which, combined with the gesture of her left hand, suggests that she is engaged in conversation. The woman directly behind the goddess raises her hands toward Aphrodite. She is dressed in a finely pleated diaphanous chiton with a plain himation pulled up over her head. Like the goddess, she has her hair pulled back in a chignon, and she wears a bracelet, earrings, and necklace, as well as a diadem adorned with leaves on her head. A third woman stands at the left end of the scene facing right. She is dressed in a chiton similar to the other two, with a plain mantle wrapped around her left arm and lower body. Her left foot rests atop a chest, and she looks in a mirror that she holds in her left hand; in her raised right hand she holds a string of beads with which she prepares to adorn herself.

Another trio of women flanks the right side of Adonis’s bed. A second goddess, most likely Persephone, is seated on a chest flanked by her companions. She wears a finely pleated diaphanous chiton, which slips off her right shoulder, and an elaborately decorated himation around her legs. Persephone gestures with the mirror that she holds up in her right hand and faces left. She wears bracelets and earrings. Behind her, a companion stands facing left and leaning with her right arm on Persephone’s shoulder. She, too, is dressed in a finely pleated diaphanous chiton, which slips off her right shoulder, but she has a plain himation. Her hair is tied back with a band, and she wears a bracelet, necklace, and earrings. In front of Persephone, a woman dances. She wears a chiton similar to the others, necklace, earrings, and diadem, and a long, richly patterned himation covers most of her body and the back of her head. Her hands appear to rest on her waist, and her head is presented in a three-quarter view as she looks back at Persephone.

B. Symposion. Three pairs of banqueters recline on three *klinai*. Each pair consists of a young, beardless man and an older, bearded one engaged in conversation. All six figures are rendered in similar poses, with their left elbows propped at the same angle on a cushion and their legs to the left. All the youths, the left figure in each pair, turn their heads to the right to look at their older partner. All the figures are partially nude, with their upper bodies exposed. They have a plain himation draped over their hips and legs and a fillet decorated with leaves encircling their heads. The bearded men on the left and right *klinai* have their right arm drawn back across their chests, and each holds a stemless drinking cup. The youth in the central pair has put down his lyre to play *kottabos* with the stemless cup he is holding by the handle with his right index finger. His companion offers him a long white fillet. The youths on the left and right *klinai* have three small balls of clay above the fingers of their right hand. The *klinai* are spread with gaily patterned cushions. Before each *kline* is a low table laden with fruits and other assorted foods.

Stand. Top. Series of human and animal combats. A youth in a chlamys grasps a deer with long antlers by the muzzle and plunges his sword into its neck. He is flanked by scenes of griffins attacking Arimasps. The Arimasp at the right wears a chlamys, has a diadem adorned with leaves on his head, and is armed with a club in his right hand. The Arimasp at the left is dressed in oriental costume and has a sword in his raised right hand. His shield lies on the ground between his legs.

Beyond the right pair, a youth, perhaps Theseus, wrestles with a bull, forcing it down on its knees. A mantle slips off his body and a baldric crosses his chest diagonally.

Further right, two youths and a hunting dog pursue a hare by a tree. Each wears a chlamys, and the one on the right has a pilos on his head and a *lagobolon* (throwing stick used for hunting hares) in his left hand. The head of the youth at left is partially destroyed. His chlamys is wrapped around his left hand, and he has a spear in his outstretched right hand.

Base. Dionysiac scene. In the center Dionysos reclines on a *kline* covered with an elaborately decorated blanket. Like Adonis on the neck of side A, he props himself up on a cushion and has a richly patterned himation wrapped around his lower body and legs. His long curly hair is encircled with a fillet, and he holds a kantharos in his outstretched right hand. Eros stands at the left, holding torches and looking back to a pair of males who seem to approach the god rapidly arm in arm in the manner of komasts. The leader is young and beardless, and looks back at his companion who is older and bearded and wears a mantle that hangs from his right shoulder and left knee. He has long curly hair with a long fillet tied around it, and in his left hand he holds a lyre. His companion is dressed in an *ependytes*, a knee-length garment elaborately decorated with crosses and chevrons and a schematic version of a sea-monster border around the neck and lower border. A himation hangs from his shoulders. His long curly hair is bound with a long fillet, and he carries a torch in his right hand.

Five satyrs and four maenads complete the scene around the gods. Silenos, depicted aged with a hairy body, plays an aulos and follows the two revelers. Behind him, a maenad dances to the right in ecstacy, her head thrown back and her drapery swirling around her. She carries a thyrsos and a grapevine with two clusters in her left hand and a large *tympanon* in the right. She wears a belted peplos patterned around the neck and a himation over her left arm. It has slipped off her right shoulder and blows back as if it were an extension of her hair. A bracelet decorates her right arm.

Behind her, two satyrs with animal skins hanging from their shoulders converge on a maenad. The one at the left threatens the maenad with a thyrsos that he holds like a spear in his extended right hand. She defends herself with a thyrsos that she holds up in her right hand. She wears a belted peplos patterned around the neck, an animal skin hangs from her shoulders, and a leafed diadem sits around her head. The satyr at right reaches down for the hare that runs in front of him.

Behind the left satyr, a maenad runs right, looking back and holding a plate in her left hand and a thyrsos in the right. She wears a belted peplos that is patterned around the neck; her hair is tied in a *krobylos*, and she has bracelets on both arms. The dancing satyr behind her has an animal skin over his shoulders, holds a white *keras* (horn) in his left hand and extends his right arm.

The final group consists of two maenads dancing ecstatically who flank a satyr. The maenads, with heads thrown back, wear belted peploi patterned around the neck, and both have bracelets on their arms. The maenad on the right holds a himation behind her; the one at the left carries a thyrsos in her left hand. Between them, a satyr with a white animal skin draped from his shoulders moves to right looking back at the maenad behind him. He is bearded and balances a *tympanon* in his left hand.

## Attribution and Date

Attributed to the vase-painters M1 (neck) and M2 (stand), formerly known as one vase painter, the Meleager Painter, by K. Kathariou. Circa 400–390 B.C.

## Dimensions and Condition

Krater: height to top of volutes 53.5 cm; height to rim 45.6 cm; diam. of rim 31.5 cm (outside); diam. of rim 28 cm (inside); diam. of body 40 cm; diam. of foot 9.5 cm.

Stand: height (without modern stem) 16.2 cm; height (with stem) 30.4 cm; diam. 34.2 cm. Approximate capacity filled to rim 22.228 liters. Krater reconstructed from fragments (around fifty) with small areas missing and filled in with plaster; head of Adonis missing. Chips missing and black gloss cracked on the ribs of the body. There is gilding missing from added-clay details in the red-figure scenes, from the hair of the African heads, and from the female heads on the handles. Several clay-relief berries from the olive wreath are lost. Stem and part of the top of stand lost and recently restored. Red and greenish misfiring on stand. Nicks and scratches. Chips missing in several areas. Abraded in places.

## Technical Features

Preliminary sketch. Relief contour for the figures on the neck and the stand. Accessory color. Red: berries rendered by relief dots. White: eyes and lips of Africans’ heads; fillet held by man in the symposion scene; Eros (on stand); hairy body, hair, and beard of Silenos; animal skin of satyr on stand, cornucopia. Gilding: dots on the palmette chains on neck, heads in the disks of volutes, hair on Africans’ heads, leaves of olive wreath on the body, bracelets, earrings, and necklaces on the figures, knobs on mirror. Dilute glaze: animal skins, hare, *krobylos* of maenad with plate on the stand.

## Bibliography

{{< q-abbr "*BAPD*" >}} 44230; “Acquisitions/1987,” {{< q-abbr "*GettyMusJ*" >}} 16 (1988): 143–44, no. 7; L. Burn, “A Dinoid Volute-krater by the Meleager Painter: An Attic Vase in the South Italian Manner,” {{< q-abbr "*Greek Vases in the Getty* 5" >}}, pp. 107–30; includes “Appendix: The Stem Reconstruction,” by L. Thoresen, pp. 123–28, figs. 1a–d, 5a–b, 7a–c, 10a–e; B. A. Sparkes, *Greek Art*, *Greece and Rome*, New Surveys in the Classics 22 (Oxford, 1991), p. 48, fig. 22; K. Schauenburg, “Der Varresemaler in Kiel,” {{< q-abbr "*JdI*" >}} 106 (1991): 187, no. 42; {{< q-abbr "Schleiffenbaum, *Volutenkrater*" >}}, pp. 368–69, no. V289a; I. Vallera-Rickerson and M. Korma, “Merika ellenika ekthemata tou Mouseiou Getty,” *Archaeologia* 43 (1992): 86, fig. 12; M. Soeldner, “Statuenbasen? Die ‘flachen Basen’ Motivgeschichte und Problematik eines Bildelements in der unteritalischen Vasenmalerei,” {{< q-abbr "*JdI*" >}} 108 (1993): 282, no. 179; {{< q-abbr "*CAH*" >}}, plates to vols. 5 and 6 (1994), p. 40, fig. 45; *Enciclopedia dell’arte antica, classica e orientale*, suppl. I2.1 (1994), s.v. “Vasi, Attici,” p. 559, fig. 618 (P. E. Arias); E. Manakidou, “Istorimena Yfasmata: mia kategoria mikrograhikon parastaseon pano se attika aggeia,” in {{< q-abbr "*Athenian Potters and Painters*" >}}, vol. 1, p. 302, no. 5; E. Towne Markus, in *Masterpieces of the J. Paul Getty Museum: Antiquities* (Los Angeles, 1997), p. 52; E. Walter-Karydi, *The Greek House: The Rise of Noble Houses in Late Classical Times* (Athens, 1998), pp. 72, 76, 77, fig. 57; M. Vickers, “Images on Textiles. The Weave of Fifth-Century Athenian Art and Society,” *Xenia* 42 (1999): 23, 42, note 41, fig. 8; {{< q-abbr "Salapata, “Τριφίλητος Άδωνις”" >}}, 31, 37, fig. 2; J. M. Barringer, *The Hunt in Ancient Greece* (Baltimore and London, 2001), p. 68, no. 121; J. Boardman, *The History of Greek Vases* (London, 2001), p. 165, fig. 193; {{< q-abbr "Curti, *Pittore di Meleagro*" >}}, pp. 24–26, 40–44, 60, 77–78, 83, 86–91, 107, no. 2; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, pp. 7­–9, 34, 36, 73, 75–77, 92, 94, 96, 97, 110, 112, 160, 162, 163, 166–68, 213, cat. no. MEL 12, pls. 4–6; *The J. Paul Getty Museum: Handbook of the Antiquities Collection* (Los Angeles, 2002), p. 81; {{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater”" >}}, pp. 307, 615; K. Hagemajer Allen, “Becoming the ‘Other’: Attitudes and Practices at Attic Cemeteries,” in *The Cultures within Ancient Greek Culture*, ed. C. Dougherty and L. Kurke (Cambridge, 2003), p. 230, fig. 29; N. Spivey and M. Squire, *Panorama of the Classical World* (London, 2004), pp. 252–53, fig. 394; M. Svoboda, “Decorative Gilding,” in {{< q-abbr "*Colors of Clay*" >}}, p. 12, fig. 4; {{< q-abbr "Cohen, “Added Clay and Gilding”" >}}, in {{< q-abbr "*Colors of Clay*" >}}, pp. 138–39, cat. no. 36, figs. 36.1–36.2; B. Barr-Sharrar, *The Derveni Krater: Masterpiece of Classical Greek Metalwork* (Princeton, 2008), pp. 80–83, figs. 74a–b; T. Mannack, “A Description,” in {{< q-abbr "*Pronomos Vase*" >}}, p. 10; L. Burn, “The Contexts of the Production and Distribution of the Athenian Painted Pottery around 400 BC,” in {{< q-abbr "*Pronomos Vase*" >}}, pp. 19, 24.

## Comparanda

For the Meleager Painter see {{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1408–15; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 187–88; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 490; L. Talcott, B. Philippaki, G. R. Edwards, and V. R. Grace, *Small Objects from the Pnyx*, *Hesperia* Suppl. 10 (Princeton, 1956), pp. 59–60; P. Corbett, {{< q-abbr "*JHS*" >}} 80 (1960): 59–60; I. McPhee, “Attic Vase-Painters of the Late 5th Century B.C.,” (Ph.D. diss., University of Cincinnati, 1973), pp. 237–56; {{< q-abbr "Robertson, *Art of Vase-Painting*" >}}, pp. 270–72; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, pp. 72–75, attributes the vases by the Meleager Painter to two separate vase-painters, M1 and M2; {{< q-abbr "Curti, *Pittore di Meleagro*" >}}; {{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater”" >}}, pp. 330–31. {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 8, suggests that the figural decoration on our krater is done by two painters: M1 (neck) and M2 (stand). {{< q-abbr "Curti, *Pittore di Meleagro*" >}}, suggests also two vase-painters and renders the neck to the Meleager Painter and the stand to the AI painter.

The vase is one of the latest preserved Attic volute-kraters.

This combination of reeding and red-figure on Attic volute-kraters placed on stands was never popular, and most known examples date to the late fifth and fourth centuries B.C. Cf. two examples, both earlier than the Getty krater: (a) New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 24.97.35 (G. M. A. Richter and L. Hall, *The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Red-Figured Athenian Vases* [New Haven, 1936], pp. 161–63, no. 128 [“Leucippid Painter”]); (b) Ferrara, Museo Nazionale di Spina T.135 A VP, inv. 5081, attributed to the Painter of Athens 12255 ({{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}} Ferrara 1 [Italy 37], pl. 13). The latter comes also from the workshop of the Meleager Painter and dates only a little earlier than the Getty krater. On the technique and its relation to metallic vessels, see {{< q-abbr "Schleiffenbaum, *Volutenkrater*" >}}, pp. 67, 73–80; N. Zimmermann, *Beziehungen zwischen Ton- und Metallgefässen spätklassischer und frühhellenistischer Zeit* (Leidorf, 1998); M. C. Miller, *Athens and Persia in the Fifth Century BC: A Study in Cultural Receptivity* (Cambridge, 1997), pp. 145–52; {{< q-abbr "Gaunt, “Attic Volute Krater”" >}}, pp. 306–20.

A chain of narrow, pointed leaves decorating shafts of handles is not common. Usually there is an ivy chain. For another example, cf. the volute krater contemporary to ours, by the Pronomos Painter, in Naples, Museo Archeologico Nazionale 3240 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1336.1; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 365–66; M. Tiverios*, Archaia Aggeia* [Athens 1996], pp. 198–99, 333–35, figs. 181–82). Cf. also the wreath of olive leaves twisted in the center of the neck on the Pronomos krater to the wreath on the body of our krater. For myrtle as ornament in Attic vase-painting, see E. Kunze-Götte, *Myrte als Attribut und Ornament auf attischen Vasen* (Kilchberg, 2006).

For the gilding technique, see M. Svoboda, “Decorative Gilding,” in {{< q-abbr "*Colors of Clay*" >}}, pp. 11–12; {{< q-abbr "Cohen, “Added Clay and Gilding”" >}}, in {{< q-abbr "*Colors of Clay*" >}}, pp. 106–17.

The Getty krater bears similarities to Apulian red-figure kraters in a number of ways. Both have gilded heads, scrolls bridging handles with neck, and heads of African men, which correspond to the swans found on the Apulian vessels. See A. D. Trendall and A. Cambitoglou, *The Red-figured Vases of Apulia*, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1978–82).

For Attic pottery at the end of the fifth century B.C., see C. Campenon, *La céramique attique à figures rouges autour de 400 avant J. C. Les principales formes, evolution et production* (Paris, 1994), esp. pp. 27–30 for volute-kraters.

For Adonis, see B. Servais-Soyez, {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 1 (1981), pt. 1, pp. 222–29, s.v. “Adonis”; W. Burkert, *Greek Religion*, trans. from German by J. Raffan (Cambridge, Mass., 1985), pp. 176–77; {{< q-abbr "Simms, “Foreign Religious Cults" >}}, pp. 209–63; L. E. Roller, “Foreign Cults in Greek Vase Painting,” in *Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Ancient Greek and Related Pottery, Copenhagen, August 31–September 4, 1987*, ed. J. Christiansen and T. Melander (Copenhagen, 1988), pp. 506–10, esp. 508–9 for the presence of Eros; {{< q-abbr "Salapata, “Τριφίλητος Άδωνις”" >}}, pp. 34–36. See also E. Reiner, *Die Rituelle Totenkage der Griechen* (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1938), pp. 105–9; C. Weber-Lehmann, “Musik um Adonis. Beobachtungen zur Rechteckkithara auf apulischen Vasen,” in {{< q-abbr "*Griechische Keramik im Kulturellen Kontext*" >}}, pp. 160–66.

Eros and Aphrodite are found on fourth-century representations of the gardens of Adonis; see {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 1 (1981), pt. 1, pp. 227–28, s.v. “Adonis.” Adonis appears again with Eros and Aphrodite on a squat lekythos in New York 22.39.26 ({{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}*,* vol. 1 [1981], pt. 1, pp. 227–28, no. 49, s.v. “Adonis”) but in a very different scene. Adonis scenes are found primarily on shapes with special relevance to women: hydriai, lekythoi, and a lebes gamikos (nuptial bowl).

For Dionysos in the works of the Meleager Painter and his circle, see {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, pp. 27–36. This type of reclining Dionysos (same as Adonis on neck) is found on works by the Dinos Painter and his group. Cf. a dinos by the Dinos Painter in Berlin, Staatliche Museen 2402 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1152.3; {{< q-abbr "Matheson, *Polygnotos*" >}}, p. 381, cat. no. D3, pl. 135); a pelike by the Somzée Painter in New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art 75.2.27 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1159.2; J. Boardman, “Boy Meets Girl: An Iconographic Encounter,” in {{< q-abbr "*Athenian Potters and Painters*" >}}, vol. 1, p. 261, fig. 2); a volute-krater by the Kadmos Painter in Ruvo, Museo Jatta 1093 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1184.1; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 460; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 340; H. Sichtermann, *Griechische Vasen in Unteritalien aus der Sammlung Jatta in Ruvo* (Tübingen, 1966), pls. 12–17); a volute- krater by Polion in Ferrara, Museo Nazionale di Spina 3033 (T 127 Valle Trebba) ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1171.1; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 959; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 338; F. Berti and P. G. Guzzo, *Spina. Storia di una città tra Greci ed Etruschi. Ferrara Castelli Estense 26.9.1993–13.3.1994* [Ferrara, 1993], p. 283, cat. no. 230). For Dionysos depicted as a beardless youth, see {{< q-abbr "Carpenter, *Dionysian Imagery in Fifth-Century Athens*" >}}, p. 92; A. Chatzidimitriou, “Red-figured Chous with a Dionysian Scene from Argyroupoli, Athens,” in {{< q-abbr "*Kerameos Paides*" >}}, p. 118.

For the kantharos as an attribute of Dionysos, see {{< q-abbr "Carpenter, *Dionysian Imagery in Archaic Greek Art*" >}}, pp. 1, 117–23; H. A. Shapiro, *Art and Cult under the Tyrants in Athens* (Mainz, 1989), pp. 91; G. Hedreen, *Silens in Attic Black-figure Vase-painting: Myth and Performance* (Ann Arbor, 1992), pp. 88–90; M. Tiverios, *Ampelou Pais Euphron Oinos. Apo tin eikonografia tis ampelou kai tou oinou sta archaia ellinika aggeia* (Athens, 2002), pp. 10, 12.

For Dionysiac dance, see {{< q-abbr "Schöne, *Thiasos*" >}}, 111–15.

For Silenos, see E. Simon, in {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 8 (1997), pt. 1, pp. 1108–33, s.v. “Silenoi.” For the presence of Silenos, see also K. Schauenburg, “Silene beim Symposion,” {{< q-abbr "*JdI*" >}} 88 (1973): 1–26.

The type of thyrsos with grapes hanging from it is found on other vases of this period and is considered an invention of the workshop of the Pronomos Painter. See {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 114, no. 115. Cf. a bell krater by the Painter of London F 64 once in Basel, art market ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1420.8; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 263, no. LON 11); calyx-krater by the Painter of Montesarchio T. 121 in Paris, Louvre N 2821 (A. L. Millin, *Peintures des vases antiques* (Paris, 1808–10), vol. 1, pl. 67; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 269, no. Mont 1); bell-krater by the Painter of Naples 3245, once in New York, art market ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1439.2; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 377; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 271, no. NA 4); cf. also a bell-krater by the Meleager Painter in Bologna, Museo Civico 329 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1410.21; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 374; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 217, no. MEL 39, pl. 16C). For the thyrsos, see [entry no. 12](/catalogue/12/) (81.AE.161).

For Eros in Dionysiac imagery, see V. Paul-Zinserling, *Der Jena-Maler und sein Kreis* (Mainz, 1994), pp. 49–53, 63–70.

On boxes, see E. Brümmer, “Griechische Truhenbehälter,” {{< q-abbr "*JdI*" >}} 100 (1985): 1–168.

For typical poses of Aphrodite from the later fifth century onward, see L. Burn, *The Meidias Painter* (Oxford, 1987), pp. 26–30.

For elaborately patterned textiles, see E. Manakidou, “Istorimena Yfasmata: mia kategoria mikrograhikon parastaseon pano se attika aggeia,” in {{< q-abbr "*Athenian Potters and Painters*" >}}, vol. 1, pp. 297–308; I. Jenkins, “The Ambiguity of Greek Textiles,” *Arethusa* 18 (1985): 109–32. For *klinai* covered with textiles, see also {{< q-abbr "Matheson, *Polygnotos*" >}}, pp. 153–54. Cf. also M. Vickers, *Images on Textiles: The Weave of Fifth-Century Athenian Art and Society*, Xenia: Konstanzer althistorische Vorträge und Forschungen 42 (Konstanz, 1999).

For the symposion scene, cf. a column-krater by the Meleager Painter in Dublin, National Museum of Ireland 1880.507 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1411.38; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 214, no. MEL 15, pl. 10A), where the poses of banqueters, the game of *kottabos*, and the patterned textiles on *klinai* provide parallels to the Getty vase.

The arrangement of the males (man–youth) on the *klinai* is typical for the subject. See P. Schmitt-Pantel, *La Cité au banquet* (Rome, 1992), pp. 17–32, esp. p. 22; J. Bremmer, “Adolescents, Symposion, and Pederasty,” in {{< q-abbr "*Sympotica*" >}}, pp. 135–48.

For symposion iconography, see J. M. Dentzer, *Le motif du banquet couché dans le Proche-Orient et le monde grec du VIIe au IVe siècle av. J.-C.* (Rome, 1982); {{< q-abbr "Lissarrague, *Greek Banquet*" >}}; T. Sini, “A Symposion Scene on an Attic Fourth-century Calyx-krater in St. Petersburg,” in *Greek Offerings: Essays on Greek Art in Honour of J. Boardman*, ed. O. Palagia (Oxford, 1997), pp. 159–65; series of articles in {{< q-abbr "*Sympotica*" >}}; and in *In Vino Veritas*, ed. O Murray and M. Tecuşan (Oxford, 1995); K. Topper, *The Imagery of the Athenian Symposium* (Cambridge, 2012); idem, “Primitive Life and the Construction of the Sympotic Past in Athenian Vase Painting,” {{< q-abbr "*AJA*" >}} 113 (2009): pp. 3–26. For the subject in late fifth–early fourth century B.C., see especially {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, pp. 63–67. See also A. Schäfer, *Unterhaltung beim griechischen Symposion. Darbietungen, Spiele und Wettkämpfe von homerischer bis in spätklassische Zeit* (Mainz, 1997), pp. 91–96; P. Schmitt Pantel, “Banquet et cité grecque,” *Mélanges de l’École française de Rome, Antiquité* 97 (1985): pp. 135–158.

For the lyre behind the *kline*, cf. the bell-krater by the Meleager Painter in Havana, Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes 189 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1411.31, 1415; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 219, no. MEL 59); also the bell-krater by the Painter of London F 64, once London, art market ({{< q-abbr "Kathariou*, Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 263, no. LON 12).

For music at the symposium, see F. W. Hamdorf, “Musik und Symposion,” in {{< q-abbr "*Kunst der Schale*" >}}, pp. 238–46; P. Jacquet-Rimassa, “Les représentations de la musique, divertissement du symposion grec, dans les céramiques attique et italiote,” {{< q-abbr "*REA*" >}} 101 (1999): 37–63. Cf. also N. Niddam and N. Strawczynski, “Objets identifiants: la lyre,” in {{< q-abbr "*Griechische Keramik im Kulturellen Kontext*" >}}, pp. 157–59; {{< q-abbr "Bundrick, *Music and Image*" >}}, pp. 14–18.

For *kottabos*, see B. Sparkes, “‘Kottabos’”: An Ancient After-dinner Game,” *Archaeology* 13 (1960): 202–7; M. Vickers, “A Kottabos Cup in Oxford,” {{< q-abbr "*AJA*" >}} 78 (1974): 158; S. Drougou, *Der attische Psykter* (Würzburg, 1975), pp. 32, 34, 85ff.; N. Hösch, “Das Kottabosspiel,” in {{< q-abbr "*Kunst der Schale*" >}}, pp. 272–75; E. Csapo and M. C. Miller, “The Kottabos-toast and an Inscribed Red-figured Cup,” *Hesperia* 60 (1991): 367–82.

For *klinai* in symposia, see [entry no. 22](#22) (76.AE.131.10).

For wreaths on banqueters, see M. Blech, *Studien zum Kranz bei der Griechen* (Berlin, 1982), pp. 63–74; {{< q-abbr "Lissarrague, *Greek Banquet*" >}}. See also L. Deubner, “Die Bedeutung des Kranzes im klassischen Altertum,” *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft* 30 (1933): 70–104; J. Klein, *Der Kranz bei den alten Greichen* (Gunzburg, 1912).

Grypomachies with Orientals occasionally called Arimasps are a favorite subject on fourth-century Attic vases (see H. Metzger, *Les représentations dans la céramique attique du IVe siècle* [Paris, 1951], pp. 327–32). For the mythical battle between Arimasps and the griffins, known as early as the sixth century B.C. and especially from Aristeas of Prokonesos, see A. Ivantchik, “La datation du poème l’Arimaspées d’Aristéas de Proconnèse,” *L’Antiquité classique* 62 (1993): 35–67. The subject has been interpreted as symbol of the struggle for immortality and is seen partly as an attempt to appeal to the tastes of the Northern peoples who bought the Kerch vases. See E. H. Loeb, “Arimaspians and Griffins on an Attic Lekanis at the Israel Museum,” *Israel Museum Journal* 5 (1986): 67–72; Paul-Zinserling, *Der Jena-Maler und sein Kreis* (supra), pp. 106–12; X. Gorbounova, in {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 8 (1997), pt. 1, pp. 529–34, s.v. “Arimaspoi”; M. Leventopoulou, in {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 8 (1997), pt. 1, pp. 609–11, nos. 1–8, s.v. “Gryps.” Cf. also the hydria with the battle of mounted Orientals and griffins in Thebes Archaeological Museum 25544 ({{< q-abbr "*CVA*" >}}, Thebes Archaeological Museum 1 [Greece 6], pl. 78). For griffins, see A. M. Bisi, *Il grifone. Storia di un motivo iconografico nell’antico Oriente mediterraneo* (Rome, 1965); I. Flagge, *Untersuchungen zur Bedeutung des Greifen* (Sankt Augustin, 1975); C. Delplace, *Le Griffon de l’archaisme à l’époque impériale. Étude iconographique et essai d’interpretation symbolique* (Rome, 1980); A. Dierichs, *Das Bild des Greigen in der frühgriechischen Flächenkunst* (Münster, 1981); C. D’Albiac, “The Griffin Combat Theme,” in *Ivory in Greece and the Eastern Mediterrenean from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic Period*, ed. J. L. Fitton (London, 1992), pp. 105–12; E. Akurgal, “Zur Enstehung des griechischen Greifenbildes,” in *Kotinos: Festschrift für Erika Simon*, ed. H. Froning, T. Hölscher, and H. Mielsch (Mainz am Rhein, 1992), pp. 33–52; A. Fariselli, “L’iconografia del grifone nello stile animalistico arcaico della Scizia europea,” *OCNUS: Quaderni della Scuola di specializzazione in archeologia (Bologna)* 3 (1995): 47–59. For the origin of the griffin from the skeletons of Protoceratops, see A. Mayor, *The First Fossil Hunters* (Princeton, 2002), pp. 15–53; D. Ruscillo, Review of “A. Mayor, *The First Fossil Hunters*, Princeton, 2002,” in {{< q-abbr "*AJA*" >}} 107 (2003): 293–95.

The two revelers approaching Dionysos on the stand have been identified as Apollo and Sabazios. See L. Burn, {{< q-abbr "*Greek Vases in the Getty* 5" >}}, p. 123. For Sabazios, see E. Simon, *Opfernde Götter* (Berlin, 1953), pp. 79–87; {{< q-abbr "Simms, “Foreign Religious Cults”" >}}, pp. 124–43; R. Gicheva, in {{< q-abbr "*LIMC*" >}}, vol. 8 (1997), pt. 1, pp. 1069–71, s.v. “Sabazios.”

The introduction of Sabazios to Dionysos by Apollo is not preserved in the literary sources, and no other depiction of it is known. {{< q-abbr "Simms, “Foreign Religious Cults”" >}}, pp. 281–82, has reservations for Sabazios’s cult in Athens before the late fourth century B.C. {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, pp. 28, 66, shows that the motif of the two figures leaning on each other is typical for the painter and his group. See also {{< q-abbr "Curti, *Pittore di Meleagro*" >}}, pp. 86–87. Cf. a column-krater by the Meleager Painter, once art market ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1409.8 *bis*; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 490; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 214, no. MEL 19); a calyx-krater by the Meleager Painter in Madrid, Museo Arqueológico Nacional 11012 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1409.11; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 215, no. MEL 27); a calyx-krater by the Meleager Painter in Wűrzburg, Martin von Wagner Museum der Universität L. 523 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1415.1; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 375; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 216, no. MEL 33); a cup by the Meleager Painter in London, British Museum E 129 ({{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1414.89; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 490; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 375; {{< q-abbr "Kathariou, *Ergasterio Z. tou Meleagrou*" >}}, p. 227, no. MEL 127, figs. 33A, 44C, pls. 39B, 40). Cf. also the group of Dionysos and Ariadne on the reverse of the Pronomos vase (volute-krater by the Pronomos Painter in Naples, Museo Archeologico Nazionale 81673, H3240; {{< q-abbr "*ARV*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 1336.1, 1704; {{< q-abbr "*Paralipomena*" >}} 480; {{< q-abbr "*Beazley Addenda*<sup>2</sup>" >}} 365; {{< q-abbr "*Pronomos Vase*" >}}). For the motif, see also H. Speier, “Zweifiguren-Gruppen im fünften und vierten Jahrhundert vor Christus,” *Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts, Römische Abteilung* 47 (1932): 29–35; E. Schwinzer, *Schwebende Gruppen in der pompejanischen Wandmalerei* (Würzburg, 1979); E. Pochmarski, *Dionysische Gruppen. Eine typologische Untersuchung zur Geschichte des Stützmotivs* (Vienna, 1990).

Sabazios wears an *ependytes* (see M. Miller, “The Ependytes in Classical Athens,” *Hesperia* 58 [1989]: 313–29).

For the aulos, see K. Schlessinger, *The Greek Aulos* (Gröningen, 1970); A. Belis, “Auloi grecs du Musée du Louvre,” {{< q-abbr "*BCH*" >}} 108 (1984): 111–22; D. Paquette, *L’instrument de musique dans la céramique de la Grèce antique*, Etudes d’organologie (Paris, 1984), pp. 23–59. For the role of musical instruments in Greek cult, see J. A. Haldane, “Musical Instruments in Greek Worship,” *Greece and Rome* 13 (1966): 98–107.

For hunting scenes, see D. B. Hull, *Hounds and Hunting in Ancient Greece* (Chicago, 1964), and pp. 59–75 for hare hunting; K. Schauenburg, *Jagddarstellungen in der griechischen Vasenmalerei* (Hamburg, 1969); {{< q-abbr "Anderson, *Hunting*" >}}; N. Malagardis, “Images du monde rural attique à l’époque archaïque,” *Archaiologike Ephemeris* 127 (1988): 109–14. Hunters in rustic hats who were merely hunting for food or living were not popular subjects in vase-painting. See M. Pipili, “Wearing an Other Hat: Workmen in Town and Country,” in {{< q-abbr "*Not the Classical Ideal*" >}}, pp. 164–66; J. Fornasier, *Jagddarstellungen des 6.–4. Jhs. v. Chr. Eine ikonographische und ikonologische Analyse* (Münster, 2001). For hunting and hunters, see also J.-L. Durand and A. Schnapp, “Sacrificial Slaughter and Initiatory Hunt,” in {{< q-abbr "*City of Images*" >}}, pp. 53–70; J. M. Barringer, *The Hunt in Ancient Greece* (Baltimore and London, 2001).

For representations of hares, see generally J. Leichtfried, *Der Hase in der antiken Kunst* (Graz, 1979).

For the *lagobolon*, see {{< q-abbr "Anderson, *Hunting*" >}}, pp. 40, 41; O. Bingöl, “Thalia mit dem Lagobolon,” in *Festschrift für Jale İnan Armağani* (Istanbul, 1989), pp. 489–93.
